Clojure north first draft (#1)
kidpollo/jackdaw-literate-examples: clojure-north.org

* Themes

 * Literate programming
   * Background
   * Org-Mode and Babel
   * Quick simple clojure project example/template.
   * References
 * Building streams apps

>    * Assumptions

Reviewer: Test

   * References
     * Kafka, Kafka Streams, Jackdaw
   * Unit testing should be all you need
     * Using transducers
   * Unfortunately thats almost never the case
     * Test machine to the rescue
        * Integration testing (app behavior)
        * System testing (multi app behavior) 
 * SBA connector
   * Show simplified example of the app using Literate Programming
   * Caveats
 * Logging, observability and monitoring
   * Structured logging
   * Realtime monitoring and instrumentation
   * Exception handling
     
* Objectives

 * Identify when Literate Programming is a good fit
 * Use Jackdaw to create production ready Kafka streams appps
 * Leverage best practices early on for faster turanound of Kafka Streams apps 

>  * Showcase how we implemnented a production Streaming app in weeks with Jackdaw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Showcase how we implemented a production Streaming app in weeks with Jackdaw
```

* Script
** Introduction

  Hello! My name is Francisco but I go as Paco. I work at Funding Circle and

>   I've been there for almost 3 years now. One of the things that most interested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  have been there for almost 3 years. One of the things that most interested
```

>   me at the time I joined was to learn and work with Kafka. I'm also a

Reviewer 2: I'd probably reword the "one of the things..." sentence. Reading out loud and something about it is throwing me off. 

Maybe "One of the reasons I joined Funding Circle was the opportunity to learn about and work with Kafka"

>   me at the time I joined was to learn and work with Kafka. I also am a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  me at the time I joined was to learn and work with Kafka. I'm also a
```

  relatively young 36 year old that has gone through major heart and brain
  surgery. I share this information because I'll use it to paint a picture about
  testing in production systems later on.

>   I want also want to share that I am far from being an Emacs or Org-mode expert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  I also want to share that I am far from being an Emacs or Org-mode expert
```

  so do share cool tips. Phone lines are always open.

>  First, lest talk a bit about how I got around to using Literate Programming

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 First, let's talk a bit about how I got around to using Literate Programming
```

>   But first, lest talk a bit about how I got around using Literate Programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 First, lest talk a bit about how I got around to using Literate Programming
```

  as a tool to learn new things.

** (LAFT) Learning all the f*ing time.

>   I consider myself a lifelong learner. Its hard for me to stay engaged on a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  I consider myself a lifelong learner. It's hard for me to stay engaged on a
```

  project if I am not learning something new. However one of the drawbacks of
  being this curious (or better said: `distracted by shiny new things`) is that
  reinforcing knowledge becomes a challenge. That's why I have particular

>   interest on finding better ways of documenting things I learned for future me.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  interest in finding better ways of documenting things I learned for future me.
```

>   Naturally, I've gather a vast amount of notes, Gists and code with a ton of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Naturally, I've gathered a vast amount of notes, Gists and code with a ton of
```

  comments that make little sense a few days after I wrote them. If I get back
  to something before knowledge gets fully reinforced, I end up having to spend
  a lot of extra time to load up again with the necessary context.
  
  Learning on the job is great and something most employers should be OK with,
  specially for newer employees or apprenticeship driven roles, but it can also
  be hard. For example, I came in to my first Clojure job not knowing much about
  Clojure or functional programming and I made the wrong choice to also try to
  learn Emacs at the same time. I saw my coworkers do amazing cool Clojure stuff

>   in Emacs and of course I was eager to learn both at the same time. I made

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in Emacs and of course I was eager to learn both. I made
```

>   the incorrect assumption that the power of Clojure came along the power of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the incorrect assumption that the power of Clojure came along with the power of
```

>   Emacs. No amount of notes and practice was making me productive in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Emacs. But no amount of notes and practice would make me productive in a
```

  actually focus on the language and less on the tooling. In hindsight this was
  obvious but my nature is to be overly optimistic and curious, so be aware of
  your limitations and optimize your learning time.

** Seeing the light

  One of the cool things I learned while pairing with my "[[https://www.reddit.com/r/emacs/comments/cslkqc/is_there_an_agreed_upon_term_for_emacs_user/][enlightened]]"
  co-workers is that org-mode in Emacs is insanely powerful and flexible. There
  are people that use it as a [[https://sachachua.com/blog/2007/12/how-to-use-emacs-org-as-a-basic-day-planner/][planning tool]] or [[https://blog.jethro.dev/posts/how_to_take_smart_notes_org/][notes taking tool]]. I am not
  particularly organized or interested enough to use org-mode as a planning tool
  but I was definitely interested on using it as a notes and documentation tool.

  I've always been fond of repositories that have a hefty amount of
  documentation, specially if all the documentation is reachable via the README
  file. I am specially a fan of Getting started sections. My code folder often
  became a graveyard of failed starts. I used to copy the getting started code

>   and paste it on my editor and run it, then I pat my back and walked away

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and paste it on my editor and run it, then I would pat my back and walk away
```

  of talking more about it lets go over a simple example of how I would setup
  and run a Clojure project using Literate programming in org-mode.

** Demo time

  + [[file:simple-app.org][Simple app]]

  Awesome, now that we have that out of the way lets talk about building
  production ready Kafka streams apps with Jackdaw. I am not going to spend a
  lot of time trying to sell the virtues of Kafka streams and Jackdaw but here
  is a quick overview.

** Org and Literate programming references.

+ https://orgmode.org/
+ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming
+ https://orgmode.org/worg/org-contrib/babel/languages/ob-doc-clojure.html

** What is Kafka anyway?

  Most of Funding Circle's software is (or in process of being) backed by
  Kafka. One of the great outcomes is that there is not mutable (locking) state.
  In other words our main state store is Kafka. This lets us shape data in a
  variety of ways better suited each business domain. In our case,
  things like processing loan applications, servicing a loan, disbursing money,
  handling the books, reconciling transactions, etc. There is no single data

>   model like in traditional relational databases. Instead we have only have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  model like in traditional relational databases. Instead we only have
```

  services that /produce/ events onto topics and services that /consume/ from
  those topics, each with their own offsets.

>   For us that decoupling is essential because data being transacted upstream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  That decoupling is essential to us, because data being transacted upstream
```

  behavior of a topology you are technically doing an integration test.

  I could go in forever but for practical purposes we generally consider any
  test we run without the needing to run Kafka is a unit test. It is very easy
  to abstract business logic into functions thanks to Jackdaw. We can also
  assume that the Kafka streams DSL transformations are always correct. The
  problem is comes when you want to validate behavior of a topology as data
  flows through it. Using spec to validate data within the boundaries of the
  transformation functions goes a long way but does not quite cover everything.

  In an ideal world all your tests should be free of external dependencies and
  the topology level tests we should cover everything. Unfortunately that's not
  the case for Kafka steams apps because there is a lot more to validating a
  topology. Mainly you also want to validate that data coming in an out of
  topology nodes is in the right shape and using the correct schema. At Funding
  Circle we use AVRO to define the schema of most of our topics. It is super
  common to run into bugs where data in the topology looks good but the does not

>   match a schema of the other way around.

Reviewer 2: should `of` be `or` here?

  Fortunately we now have a few ways we learned to deal with this issues.

  For the schema vs (EDN) data in our Topologies rely on Clojure specs. Having
  specs to describe the data is great but we also use it to generate the AVRO
  schemas we are going to write to. We have spec-to-avro compiler which we use
  to publish and update the AVRO schemas our topics support and in our tests we
  rely on generators to produce any dummy data we want to test with in addition
  to being able to do generative testing to achieve the ultimate level of
  confidence in our tests. Recently we even started to create different sets of
  specs for reading and writing operations as the schema constraints of writing
  to a topic and reading from a topic drift over time as a schema evolves. This

>   is particularly more painful because of our use of [[https://docs.confluent.io/current/schema-registry/avro.html][AVRO]].

Reviewer 2: Why is it more painful?

  For validating the behavior of a topology (integration testing) we now rely on
  [[https://github.com/FundingCircle/jackdaw/blob/master/doc/test-machine.md][Test Machine]]. This is a newer addition to the Jackdaw library that uses the
  ~TopologyTestDriver~ that appeared in Kafka version 2.4.0. It allows us to
  create a fixture that allows us to run a topology without the need to run a
  Kafka. This is actually a very interesting subject but it is a bit out of
  scope of this presentation. I'll add a link to the references where you can
  learn more on this subject. The ~TopologyTestDriver~ covers most of our
  integration testing needs but sometimes we want to test the behavior of more
  than one topology at the time or the test the interaction of topology with the
  schema registry and a mocked service. For this scenarios we Test Machine
  actually supports multiple drivers. Allowing us to setup tests that can run
  against a Kafka or Kafka rest proxy. This is a super powerful feature of
  Jackdaw I suggest you learn more about.

>   Finally, we arrive to the top of the testing pyramid. The "god" level tests;

Reviewer 2: If you weren't planning on it, I'd suggest having visuals that step through a testing pyramid to help the audience and you be on the same page.

Reviewer 2: Also, maybe some sort of thing like:

"So, we get to the top of the testing pyramid and here is where we have our expensive tests. The ones that test the whole system. The ones that when they fail, they leave you wondering 'what happened?' I always connect these types of test to my personal health story"

(obviously, feel free to ignore anything I'm suggesting, I won't be sad)

  Which bring me to my personal health story and why we should be careful with
  expensive tests.

>   On my first year of college I fell into medical hardship due to a very

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  On my first year of college I fell into medical hardship due to very
```

>   expensive and inconclusive tests. I was miss diagnosed with epilepsy after a few

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  expensive and inconclusive tests. I was misdiagnosed with epilepsy after a few
```

  consecutive fainting spells. I was young and inexperienced and let fear put me on
  a treatment I could not afford and did not need.

  Years later and a with a lot of research on my own I decided there was no
  reason to continue this treatment. I had no answers for the fainting spells
  yet, but I sure did not have epilepsy. This was emotionally taxing which
  eventually led me to start taking SSRIs. A psychiatrist diagnosed my anxiety
  with simple observations, simple tests if you will.
 
  Years later the fainting spells came back and I still had no diagnosis. I had

>   moved to San Francisco and doctors this side of the border still had no clue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  moved to San Francisco and doctors this side of the border had no clue
```

  either. One night the right circumstances for a diagnosis came after I passed
  out following a somewhat strong earthquake. My girlfriend (now wife) saw me

>   pass out insisted we go to the hospital in spite me telling her this was a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pass out and insisted we go to the hospital in spite me telling her this was a
```

  circumstances. Turns out I had a rare condition linked to dehydration and
  other environmental factors that causes my vasovagal response to be quite
  severe. Each one of those times I was passing out I was not fainting, I was
  actually rebooting. I left the hospital a few weeks later with a pacemaker.
  Fainting mystery solved.

  And what about that brain surgery you might ask? Well, remember those
  expensive tests? Much like with code, expensive tests can yield misleading
  results. Only back then the Doctors where not looking at the right thing. They
  missed that I had a super rare and deadly benign tumor that was starting to
  form in my brain. They just focused on ruling out bigger non deadly benign
  tumor that I also had in another region of my brain. Ten years after that
  first expensive test I decided to follow up on that benign tumor that was
  deemed unrelated to my fainting spells. I wanted to see if it had anything to
  do some minor headaches I was having at the time. Turns out the other deadly
  tumor was close to becoming a real big problem. Shortly after, I had brain
  surgery to remove it. I was spared from a really terrible outcome by chance

>   and by a radiologist that wasn't clouded by my fainting spells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and by a radiologist that wasn't distracted by my fainting spells.
```

  Moral of the story is that the top of the testing pyramid is not bad but its
  value is only worth if you know what you are looking for. They are also can
  become heavy to carry around and hard to live with.

*** Structured logging as a first class citizen (observability)

  Wouldn't it be nice if our body spit out logs about everything that happened
  inside them? It would be terrible, I know. Logging can be annoying, verbose
  and useless. In recent years the practice of [[https://stackify.com/what-is-structured-logging-and-why-developers-need-it][Structured Logging]] has become
  more popular. This practice also jives well with the "It's just data" Clojure
  mantra. The idea is fairly straightforward, we log data instead of

>   unstructured text. This has many bennefits like making it easier to find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  unstructured text. This has many benefits like making it easier to find
```

  needles in the stacks upon stacks of logs produced by multiple services but
  also makes problems easier to diagnose and trace. This practice is not without
  its flaws but can be greately mitigated by applying it [[https://www.graylog.org/post/3-steps-to-structuring-logs-effectively][effectively]]. Some best
  practices I want to share are:

  - Create a common logging api shared accross all your namespaces.
    - Can be shared accross projects.
    - Ensure common fieldnames.
  - Dont get too crazy logging data.
    - Mitigate processing delays and bottlenecks on infrastructure.
    - Graylog does not support data nested more than 1 level.
  - Create runboks and alerts that include logging queries.
    - React quicly to production issues.
    - Creates a shared understanding of the system during runtime.
    
*** Monitoring and metrics

>   Structred logging alone is not enough for diagnosis of production systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Structured logging alone is not enough for diagnosis of production systems.
```

>   Realtime information is as important and valuable. Much like that hear monitor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Realtime information is as important and valuable. Much like that heart monitor
```

  that showed me flatline lead to my diagnosis, no volume of data will have as
  much impact as realtime feedback. Metrics can also be [[https://martinfowler.com/articles/useOfMetrics.html][misutilized]] so here are
  some of the main practices for metrics:

  - Gather detaild JVM memory metrics.
    - JVM GC ... 'nuff said
    - Helps debug JVM options changes.
  - Instrument your logging events to produce metrics.
    - Cross reference event counts in real time.
    - 2 corroborating data points are better than one.
    - Gain confidence on your system.
    - Create custom alerts in the event of suspected buggy behavior.
  - Publish Kafka Streams common metrics.
    - Common dashboards across apps.
    - Being able to see the consumer offsets in real time is priceless.

** Demo time
   

>   We recently had the opportunity of putting all this practices from the past

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We recently had the opportunity of putting all these practices from the past
```
